## Cisco Packet Tracer

In the beginning of my networking journey, I found out that to learn networking better, I had to practice what I was going to learn. <br>
Of course I hadn't the physical space and the economic resources to buy such expensive devices and cables and improvise a lab on my bedroom desk, so I had to find a way to get the compnents I needed (such as
routers, switches, ecc.), but in s digital way. <br>
I found out this program called **Cisco Packet Tracer**, the program allows you to choose the components that you want, place them in a virtual environment and connect them via cables or via a wireless way. <br>
Then you can access the terminal of the placed computers and start to simulate real simulations, for example sending packet across compelx networks. <br>
When you have some confidence with it you can start to use servers and IoT devices to build even more comple networks. <br>
The cool thing is that you can switch to *physical mode* and see how the components are positioned on the rackets of your studio and start to disconnect and connect cables through the ports of your devices, this let
you have a complete experience that simulate real situation. <br>
The best thing of CIsco Packet Tracer is that it's free and it costs nothing. <br>
<br>
Since I knew nothing of Cisco PAcket Tracer, I started to take the course: [Getting Started with Cisco Packet Tracer](https://www.netacad.com/courses/getting-started-cisco-packet-tracer?courseLang=en-US), which is
an intriduction to the program and a guide to understand better the GUI and to take some confidence with the program.<br>
It's a 2 hour-long course but it's essential to start to use Cisco Packet Tracer in the best way, it's a very clear and easy course to follow. <br>
To learn Cisco PAcket Tracer I used the platform [netacad](https://www.netacad.com/), which is a cisco-based website and it has lots of interesting courses, not only on networking but also on other topics correlated
to the tech world, first of all create an account and then you're ready to start to take the course.
<br>
<br>
When you are confident and you know well Cisco Packet Tracer, we can effectively move to the real networking course.
<br><br>
See you
