# Microsoft Network Fundamentals Course

To start the real journey into networking I decided to see what is goign to be and to have a general and shallow base of networking. <br>
To accomplish this I enrolled to do the Microsoft course on networking, the [Microsoft Network Fundamentals Course](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/modules/network-fundamentals/). <br>
I strated it without knowing anythin gabout networking, at surely at the beginning I was a little bit overwhelmed by all of the new stuff and the concepts, which can be very diffcult. <br>
After finishing it, my tip is to take the course not so serious, but in a way that it lets you to enter the wolrd of netwoking and understand the basics stuffs that you're going to learn more deeply in the Cisco Netacad Course. <br>
To help you doing it through the course I have taken some notes that can really help you, in this way you and me can come back at every time and revise the core concepts and definitons in this notes, I'll leave them under here, but feel free to copy the markdown language and transform them in a pdf file, to print it and to have it ready at any time.
The course lasts around 1:30 hour, but if you stay constant and you try to undersantd as much as you can, you will finish this course with a general knowledge about networking and an idea of what you're going to learn in a deeper way in future courses.
<br><br>
I leave the notes down here, hope this helps.
<br>
Good Luck!!
<br><br><br><br><br>

# Microsoft Network Fundamentals Course Notes
<br>
[Link to the course](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/modules/network-fundamentals/)


**Network** = a collection of network-enabled devices, typically made up of computers, switches, routers, printers, and servers.

**Standards** = set of rules for data communication that are needed for the exchange of information among devices.
They define how network components should be designed and how they should interact.how network components should be designed, they can also include protocols.
They establish common physical and electrical characteristics, data formats, and transmission methods.

**Protocols** = a set of rules that determines how data is sent and received over a network. The protocol is just like a language that computers use to talk to each other, ensuring they understand and can respond to each other's messages correctly. Protocols help make sure that data moves smoothly and securely between devices on a network.
To make communication successful between devices, some rules and procedures should be agreed upon at the sending and receiving ends of the system.
They define the **language** that devices use to communicate.

<br><br>
### Types of networks:

- *Personal area network (PAN)*: provides networking needs around an individual. An example of a PAN is where a smartphone, smartwatch, tablet, and laptop all connect and share data without the need to connect to an access point or other non-Microsoft network services. PAN networks typically use Bluetooth® to communicate because it provides a low-power, short-range data-sharing capability. The network standards associated with a PAN are Bluetooth and IEEE 802.15.
  
- *Local area network (LAN)*: provides networking needs around a single location, such as an office, a school, a university, a hospital, or an airport. Typically, a LAN is privately owned and requires authentication and authorization to access. Of the different classifications of a network, a LAN is by far the most commonly used.  
  
- *Metropolitan area network (MAN)*: provides networking capabilities between different locations within a city or metropolitan area to provide a single extensive network. Typically, a MAN requires a dedicated and secure connection between each LAN joined to the MAN.
  
- *Wide area network (WAN)*: provides networking capabilities between different geographical locations locally or worldwide. For example, a WAN is used to connect an organization's head office with branch offices all over the region. A WAN links multiple LANs together to create one super network. With a WAN, you use a virtual private network (VPN) to manage the connection between different LANs.

<br><br>
### Network Topologies:

- *Bus*: In a bus topology, each network device is connected to a single network cable. Even though it's the simplest type of network to implement, it has limitations. The first limitation is the length of the main cable or bus. The longer it gets, the higher the chance of signal dropout. This limitation constrains the physical layout of the network. All devices must be physically located near each other, for example, in the same room. Finally, if there's a break in the bus cable, the whole network fails.
  
- *Ring*: In a ring topology, each network device is connected to its neighbor to form a ring. This form of network is more resilient than the bus topology. A break in the cable ring also affects the performance of the network.
  
- *Mesh*: The mesh topology is described as either a physical mesh or a logical mesh.
  In a physical mesh, each network device connects to every other network device in the network. It dramatically increases the resilience of a network, but has the physical overhead of connecting all devices. Few networks today are built as a full mesh. Most networks use a partial mesh, where some machines interconnect, but others connect through one device.
  There's a subtle difference between a physical mesh network and a logical one. The perception is that most modern networks are mesh based, since each device can see and communicate with any other device on the network. However, this topology describes a logical mesh network, and is primarily made possible by using network protocols.
  
- *Star*: The star topology is the most commonly used network topology. Each network device connects to a centralized hub or switch. Switches and hubs can be linked together to extend and build more extensive networks. This type of typology is, by far, the most robust and scalable.

<br><br>
### Ethernet

Ethernet is a networking standard that's synonymous with wire-based LAN networks, and is also used in MAN and WAN networks. Ethernet replaces other wired LAN technologies like ARCNET and Token Ring, and is an industry standard.

While Ethernet is associated with wired networks, keep in mind that it isn't limited to wire, because it's used over fiber-optic links as well.

The Ethernet standard defines a framework for data transmission, error handling, and performance thresholds. It describes the rules for configuring an Ethernet network and how each element in the network interacts with each other.

Ethernet is used in the OSI model at the data link and physical layers. It formed the basis for the IEEE 802.3 Standard. This standard helped to unify network and hardware development.

Ethernet is a continually evolving standard, and the original version supported a data transmission rate of only 2.94 Mbps. In recent years, several iterations were released to keep up with the demands for increased speed. Today, rates extend up to 400 Gbps.

There are mainly 4 types of Ethernet connections:
- Fast Ethernet
- Gigabit Ethernet
- 10 Gigabit Ethernet
- Terabit Ethernet

<br><br>
### Network standards

While network protocols provide a unified method for communication, network standards govern the hardware and software that use them.

Today, there are hundreds of thousands of hardware suppliers. Yet all of their technology seamlessly integrates with your computer or network with minimal effort. Network standards provide a framework that enables the interoperability between devices.

Network standards improve the interoperability of different network-enabled devices and provide backward compatibility between product revisions and differing vendors. The official bodies that publish regulated standards are the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE).

It would be impossible to build networks and connect network-enabled devices reliably without network standards.

The most famous network standards are:
- 802.3: Ethernet
- 802.11: Wi-Fi
- 802.15.1: Bluetooth

<br><br>
### Media Access Control (MAC)

The media access control (MAC) address is a unique identifier assigned to every network-enabled device at the time of manufacture. It can be referred to as the burned-in address, the Ethernet hardware address, or a physical address.
The MAC address has a standard composition of six hexadecimal numbers separated by a colon or dash. The first three numbers of the MAC address define the manufacturer's organizationally unique identifier (OUI), and the remaining three numbers uniquely identify the device. For example, if the MAC address is `AA-6A-BA-2B-68-C1`, then the OUI is `AA-6A-BA` and the device ID is `2B-68-C1`.

<br><br>
### Network Devices:

- *Repeater*: a two-port device that repeats network signals. Repeaters are used when network devices are some distance from each other. The repeater doesn't modify or interpret data packets before it resends them, and it doesn't amplify the signal. Instead, it regenerates the data packet at the original strength, bit by bit.
  
- *Bridge*: divides a network into network segments and can filter and forward data packets between these segments. Bridges use the network device's MAC address to determine the data package's destination. Typically, a bridge is used to improve network performance by reducing unnecessary network traffic on network segments.
  
- *Hub*: acts as a multiport repeater on a network. Hubs are used to connect more than one device and to structure the layout of a network. For example, you can cascade hubs to create network branches, or use as an endpoint to create a star layout with multiple-user-type devices. Hubs contain multiple ports that act as an input/output Ethernet connection between the hub and a network device. A hub can operate at only one speed, which is the speed of the slowest network device on the network. It doesn't interpret or filter data packets, and sends copies of each data packet to all attached devices.
  
- *Switch*: combines the functionality of a bridge and a hub. It segments networks and can interpret and filter packet data to send it directly to an attached network device. Switches use the network device's MAC address to determine the data package's destination. A switch operates in full-duplex mode, which means it can send and receive data to and from network devices at the same time.
  
- *Router*: links networks with different ranged addresses together. They can interpret and filter data packets, and then forward them to the correct network. Routers use the network device's IP address information to route the data package to its destination. Most routers can now detect issues with data traffic that flows to any attached network and route or reroute it around the issue. A router is also called a gateway. When you configure network devices, you usually configure them with a default gateway IP address.
  There are different types of routers: [link](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/modules/network-fundamentals/3-network-infrastructure#:~:text=Gateway%20Protocol%20(BGP).-,Types,-Most%20routers%20use)

<br><br>
### Common terms in networking

- *Network address*: a unique identifier that identifies a network-enabled device. A network-enabled device might have more than one address type.
  The first type is a media access control (MAC) address that identifies the network interface on the hardware level. The second type is an Internet Protocol (IP) address that identifies the network interface on a software level.

- *Data packet*: a unit that's used to describe the message that two devices on a network send each other. A data packet consists of raw data, headers, and potentially a trailer. The header contains several information items. For example, it includes the sender and destination device addresses, the size of the packet, the protocol used, and the packet number. The trailer in a data packet deals with error checking.
  The concept is similar to sending someone a letter in the mail one section at a time. For example, instead of sending several pages in one envelope, each page is sent in a separate envelope. Enough information is sent in each envelope to allow the recipient to piece together the complete message after receiving all the pages.
  
- *Datagram*: is considered the same as a data packet.
  Datagrams commonly refer to data packets of an unreliable service, where delivery can't be guaranteed.
  
- *Routing*: the mechanism used to make sure that data packets follow the correct delivery path between the sending and receiving devices on different networks.
  For example, think about the PC you're using and the server that's serving the page you're currently reading. Multiple networks might connect your PC and the server, and various paths might be available between these two devices.

<br><br>
### Protocols
Protocols fall into three categories:

- *Network communication protocols*: Communication protocols focus on establishing and maintaining a connection between devices. As you work with different devices and network services, you use various network communication protocols.
  
  First, we need to define three foundational protocols of all internet-based networks. These three protocols are Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), Internet Protocol (IP), and User Datagram Protocol (UDP). These protocols deal with the logical transmission of data over the network.
  
  - **Transmission Control Protocol**: TCP divides data into data packets that can be sent securely and quickly while minimizing the chance of data loss. It provides a stable and reliable mechanism for the delivery of data packets across an IP-based network. Even though TCP is an effective connection-oriented protocol, it has overhead.
  - **Internet Protocol**: IP is responsible for the addressing of a data packet. IP encapsulates the data packet to be delivered and adds an address header. The header contains information on the sender and recipient IP addresses. This protocol isn't concerned about the order in which the packets are sent or received. It also doesn't guarantee that a packet is delivered, only the address.
  - **User Datagram Protocol**: UDP is a connectionless protocol that offers a low-latency and loss-tolerant implementation. UDP is used with processes that don't need to verify that the recipient device received a datagram.
  
- *Network security protocols*: Network security protocols are designed to maintain the security of data across your network. These protocols encrypt in-transmission messages between users, services, and applications.
  Network security protocols use encryption and cryptographic principles to secure messages.
  
- *Network management protocols*: In your network, it's perfectly acceptable to have multiple different protocols running concurrently. Previously, we discussed communications and security protocols. Equally important to the successful day-to-day running and operating of a network are the management protocols. The focus of this type of protocol is the sustainability of the network by looking at faults and performance.
  Network administrators need to monitor their networks and any devices attached to them. Each device in your network exposes some indicators about the state and health of the device. The network administrator tool requests these indicators and uses them for monitoring and reporting.

<br><br>
### Ports
A port is a logical construct that allows the routing of incoming messages to specific processes. There's a particular port for every type of IPS. A port is an unsigned 16-bit number in the range 0 to 65535, and is also known as a port number. Based on the communications protocol used, the sending TCP or UDP layer assigns the ports.

There are specific port numbers reserved for every service. The first 1,024 ports, called the well-known port numbers, are reserved for the commonly used services. The high-numbered ports, called the ephemeral ports, are unreserved and used by dedicated applications.

Every port links to a specific service or communications protocol. It means that the target network device, like a server, can receive multiple requests on each port and service each of them without conflict.

<br><br>
### Internet Protocol suite (IPS)
The Internet Protocol suite is a collection of communication protocols, also called a protocol stack. It can be referred to as the TCP/IP protocol suite, because both TCP and IP are primary protocols used in the suite.

The IPS is an abstract, layered networking reference model. The IPS describes the different layered protocols used to send and receive data on the internet and similar networks.

The IPS model is one of several similar networking models that varies between three and seven layers. The best-known model is the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) networking reference model.

<br><br>
### Address Resolution Protocol (ARP)
The Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) is a communications protocol within the Internet Protocol suite. It's a request-response protocol used to resolve the media access control (MAC) address for a given IP address. ARP supports many data link layer technologies, such as Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4), DECnet, and PUP. When an Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) address is resolved, the Neighbor Discovery Protocol (NDP) is used instead of ARP. Without ARP, there would be no means to resolve an IP address to a physical device address.

There's also the Reverse Address Resolution Protocol (RARP), which retrieves an IP address based on the given MAC address.

<br><br>
### TCP/IP
The Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol is a collection of different communication protocols that support and define how network-enabled devices interconnect with each other over an IP-based network. At its heart are two key protocols: TCP and IP. TCP/IP makes the internet possible, including private and public networks, such as intranets and extranets.

TCP/IP defines the way data is shared between network-enabled devices by defining the end-to-end communication process. It manages how the message is broken down into packets of data, which are sometimes known as datagrams. TCP/IP also determines how the packet is addressed and transmitted, routed, and received. TCP/IP can determine the most efficient route across a network.

The TCP/IP model is designed to be stateless. This design means the network stack treats each request as new because it isn't related to the previous request. However, one part of the TCP/IP model isn't stateless. The transport layer operates in a stateful mode because it maintains a connection until all the packets in the message are received.

TCP/IP is an open standard. TCP/IP is governed, but no single organization owns it, so it works with all operating systems, networks, and hardware.

Layers of the TCP/IP protocol:
- **Application layer**: The application layer determines which communication protocols are used. This layer includes HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP), DNS, File Transfer Protocol (FTP), Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP), Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP), Post Office Protocol (POP), Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP), Secure Shell (SSH), Telnet, and TLS/SSL.
- **Transport layer**: This layer splits the application data into manageable ordered chunks by using the right port for the application protocol used. The protocols associated with this layer are TCP and the User Datagram Protocol (UDP).
- **Internet layer**: Also called the network layer, this layer ensures the data packet gets to its destination. The protocols associated with this layer are IP, IPv4, IPv6, Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP), and Internet Protocol Security (IPsec).
- **Network access layer**: This layer is responsible for defining how the data is sent across the network. The protocols associated with this layer are ARP, MAC, Ethernet, digital subscriber line (DSL), and Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN).

<br><br>
### Internet Protocol standards

**IPv4**

Internet Protocol version 4 was released in 1983, and is the standard for all packet-switch-based networks in use today. IPv4 uses a 32-bit address space that gives an upper limit of 4,294,967,296 (4.3 billion) unique logical IP addresses. A large number of these available IP addresses are reserved for a specific purpose, such as private networks, local hosts, internet relays, documentation, and subnets.

*Structure of an IPv4 address*

The structure of an IPv4 address is four decimal numbers in the range of 0 to 255, each separated with a dot. This structure is also known as the dotted-decimal format. An example of an IP address is 192.168.0.1.

*Parts of an IPv4 address*

There are two parts to an IP address, the network and the host. Let's use the address `192.168.0.1` as an example.

The network part of an IP address covers the first set of decimal numbers. In the example, that's `192.168.0`. This number is unique to the network and specifies the class of the network. There are many network classes available, as described in the following section.

The host part of the IP address covers the next set of decimal numbers. In the example, that's `1`. This number represents the device and must be unique within the network to avoid address conflicts. Each device on a network segment must have a unique address.

**IPv6**

Internet Protocol version 6 is the latest version of the IP standard. The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), designed and developed IPv6 to address the problem of IPv4 logical address exhaustion. It was intended to eventually replace the IPv4 standard. It was adopted as a recognized internet standard in July 2017.

IPv6 uses a 128-bit address space, which allows 2128 addresses. This amount is approximately 7.9x1028 times more than IPv4.

IPv4 and IPv6 weren't designed to be interoperable, which slowed down the transition to the newer IPv6 standard.

IPv6 also introduced several benefits:

- **Simplified network configuration**: IPv6 has address autoconfiguration built into the protocol. For example, a router broadcasts the network prefix, and the network device can append its MAC address to self-assign a unique IPv6 address.
- **Security**: IPsec is built into IPv6.
- **New service support**: IPv6 eliminates the need for NAT, which makes it easier to create peer-to-peer networks.
- **Multicast and anycast functionality**: Multicast allows for the broadcast of messages in a one-to-many fashion. Anycast allows a single destination to have multiple routing paths to two or more endpoint destinations.

*Structure of an IPv6 address*

The structure of IPv6 is different from IPv4. Instead of four decimal numbers, it uses eight groups of four hexadecimal numbers called a hexadectet. Each hexadectet is separated with a colon. A full IPv6 address looks like this: `2001:0db8:0000:0000:0000:8a2e:0370:7334`.

The new standard allows for the address to be simplified by using the following rules:

- One or more leading zeros from any group can be removed, so `0042` becomes `42`.
- Consecutive sections of zeros are replaced with a double colon (`::`), which can be used only once in an address.

The shortened version of the IPv6 example is `2001:db8::8a2e:370:7334`. Notice that all the instances of `0000` are removed.

<br><
### Subnets
A subnet defines one or more logical networks within the class A, B, or C network. Without subnets, you can only have a single network in each of the class A, B, or C networks.

An IP address, also known as a network address or routing prefix, represents the address of the device or computer to send the packet of data. A subnet, or host address, represents which network or subnetwork to use. A subnet is a 32-bit number framed by using the dotted-decimal format. For example, 255.255.255.0 is a standard subnet mask.

In an IPv4 network, for a packet of data to be routed to the correct network and network device, a routing prefix is needed. A routing prefix is created by taking the subnet mask and applying a bitwise `AND` to the IP address.

A more common way to define the subnet and the routing prefix is to use the Classless Interdomain Routing (CIDR) notation. CIDR applies to the IP address as the number of bits you want to allocate to your subnet. Using CIDR notation, at the end of the IP address, add a "/" and then the number of bits. For example, 198.51.100.0/24 is the same as using the dotted-decimal format subnet mask 255.255.255.0. It offers an address range of 198.51.100.0 to 198.51.100.255.

<br>
### DNS
DNS is a decentralized lookup service that translates a human-readable domain name or URL into the IP address of the server that's hosting the site or service. The worldwide distributed nature of DNS is a vital component of the internet. DNS has been in use since its inception in 1985.

A DNS server serves two purposes. The first is to maintain a cache of recently searched-for domain names, which improves performance and reduces network traffic. The second is to act as the start of authority (SOA) for all the domains under it. When a DNS server is looking to resolve a domain name that isn't held in its cache, it starts with the highest level, the dot. It then works down the subdomains until it finds the DNS server acting as the SOA. Once found, it stores the IP address of the domain in its local cache.

The DNS also holds specific records that relate to the domain. These records include the SOA, IP addressing (A and AAAA), SMTP email (MX), name servers (NS), and domain name alias (CNAME) records.
